[FLINK-19859][document] Add document for the upsert-kafka connector (#14017)
apache/flink: docs/dev/table/connectors/upsert-kafka.md

distributed with this work for additional information
regarding copyright ownership.  The ASF licenses this file
to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
"License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

  http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
software distributed under the License is distributed on an
"AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
specific language governing permissions and limitations
under the License.
-->

<span class="label label-primary">Scan Source: Unbounded</span>
<span class="label label-primary">Sink: Streaming Upsert Mode</span>

* This will be replaced by the TOC
{:toc}

The Upsert Kafka connector allows for reading data from and writing data into Kafka topics in the upsert fashion.

More precisely, the value part of the record is interpreted as an "UPDATE" of the last value for the same key.
If the record doesn't exist yet, it will treat the record as an INSERT message. With the tombstone semantic in kafka,

> it will interpret the record whose value part is null as a DELETE message.

Reviewer: The Upsert Kafka connector allows for reading data from and writing data into Kafka topics in the upsert fashion.

As a source, the upsert-kafka connector produces a changelog stream, where each data record represents an update or delete event. More precisely, the value in a data record is interpreted as an UPDATE of the last value for the same key, if any (if a corresponding key doesn’t exist yet, the update will be considered an INSERT). Using the table analogy, a data record in a changelog stream is interpreted as an UPSERT aka INSERT/UPDATE because any existing row with the same key is overwritten. Also, null values are interpreted in a special way: a record with a null value represents a “DELETE”.

As a sink, the upsert-kafka connector can consume a changelog stream. It will write INSERT/UPDATE_AFTER data as normal Kafka messages value, and write DELETE data as Kafka messages with null values (indicate tombstone for the key). Flink will guarantee the message ordering on the primary key by partition data on the values of the primary key columns, so the update/deletion messages on the same key will fall into the same partition.

Dependencies
------------

To use the connector, add the following Maven dependency to your project:
{% highlight xml %}
<dependency>
  <groupId>org.apache.flink</groupId>

>   <artifactId>flink-connector-kafka_2.11</artifactId>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  <artifactId>flink-connector-kafka_{{site.scala_version_suffix}}</artifactId>
```

  <version>1.12-SNAPSHOT</version>
</dependency>

> {% endhighlight %}

Reviewer: ```
In order to setup the upsert-kafka connector, the following table provide dependency information for both projects using a build automation tool (such as Maven or SBT) and SQL Client with SQL JAR bundles.

| Kafka Version       | Maven dependency                                          | SQL Client JAR         |
| :------------------ | :-------------------------------------------------------- | :----------------------|
| universal               | `flink-connector-kafka{{site.scala_version_suffix}}`      | {% if site.is_stable %} [Download](https://repo.maven.apache.org/maven2/org/apache/flink/flink-sql-connector-kafka{{site.scala_version_suffix}}/{{site.version}}/flink-sql-connector-kafka{{site.scala_version_suffix}}-{{site.version}}.jar) {% else %} Only available for [stable releases]({{ site.stable_baseurl }}/dev/table/connectors/upsert-kafka.html) {% endif %}|
```

1. add SQL CLI JAR
2. use variables instead of hard code the version.

How to create an Upsert Kafka table
----------------

The example below shows how to create an Upsert Kafka table:

<div class="codetabs" markdown="1">
<div data-lang="SQL" markdown="1">
{% highlight sql %}
CREATE TABLE upsertKafkaTable (
  user_id BIGINT,
  item_id BIGINT,
  category_id BIGINT,
  behaviour STRING,
  ts TIMESTAMP(3),
  PRIMARY KEY (user_id) NOT ENFORCED
) WITH (
  'connector' = 'upsert-kafka',
  'topic' = 'user_behaviour',
  'properties.bootstrap.servers' = 'localhost:9092',
  'key.format' = 'json',
  'value.format' = 'json',

>   'value.fields-include' = 'ALL'

Reviewer: We don't need this as this is the default value.

> )

Reviewer: Please add a more concreate example for how to insert an aggregation result into this upsert kafka table, and how to read from the upsert kafka table.

You can learn examples in [FLIP-149](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/FLINK/FLIP-149%3A+Introduce+the+upsert-kafka+Connector#FLIP149:IntroducetheupsertkafkaConnector-Examples) and [this doc](https://docs.ksqldb.io/en/latest/tutorials/examples/).

{% endhighlight %}
</div>
</div>

<span class="label label-danger">Attention</span> Make sure to define the primary key in the ddl.

Connector Options
----------------

<table class="table table-bordered">
    <thead>
      <tr>
      <th class="text-left" style="width: 25%">Option</th>
      <th class="text-center" style="width: 8%">Required</th>
      <th class="text-center" style="width: 7%">Default</th>
      <th class="text-center" style="width: 10%">Type</th>
      <th class="text-center" style="width: 50%">Description</th>
    </tr>
    </thead>
    <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td><h5>connector</h5></td>
      <td>required</td>
      <td style="word-wrap: break-word;">(none)</td>
      <td>String</td>
      <td>Specify which connector to use, for the Upsert Kafka use: <code>'upsert-kafka'</code>.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><h5>topic</h5></td>
      <td>required</td>
      <td style="word-wrap: break-word;">(none)</td>
      <td>String</td>

>       <td>Topic name to read from or write to when the table is used as source or sink.</td>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      <td>The Kafka topic name to read from and write to.</td>
```

    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><h5>properties.bootstrap.servers</h5></td>
      <td>required</td>
      <td style="word-wrap: break-word;">(none)</td>
      <td>String</td>
      <td>Comma separated list of Kafka brokers.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><h5>key.format</h5></td>
      <td>required</td>
      <td style="word-wrap: break-word;">(none)</td>
      <td>String</td>

>       <td>The format used to deserialize and serialize the key part of the Kafka messages that is derived from the primary key.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      <td>The format used to deserialize and serialize the key part of the Kafka messages. The key part fields are specified by the PRIMARY KEY syntax.
```

>       The supported formats are <code>'csv'</code>, <code>'json'</code>, <code>'avro'</code>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      The supported formats include <code>'csv'</code>, <code>'json'</code>, <code>'avro'</code>.
```

      Please refer to <a href="{% link dev/table/connectors/formats/index.md %}">Formats</a> page for more details and more format options.
      </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><h5>value.format</h5></td>
      <td>required</td>
      <td style="word-wrap: break-word;">(none)</td>
      <td>String</td>
      <td>The format used to deserialize and serialize the value part of the Kafka messages.

>       The supported formats are <code>'csv'</code>, <code>'json'</code>, <code>'avro'</code>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      The supported formats include <code>'csv'</code>, <code>'json'</code>, <code>'avro'</code>.
```

      Please refer to <a href="{% link dev/table/connectors/formats/index.md %}">Formats</a> page for more details and more format options.
      </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
       <td><h5>value.fields-include</h5></td>
       <td>required</td>
       <td style="word-wrap: break-word;"><code>'ALL'</code></td>
       <td>String</td>

>        <td>Controls which field should end up in the value as well. Available value:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
       <td>Controls which fields should end up in the value as well. Available values:
```

       <ul>

>          <li><code>ALL</code>: the value part of the record contains all fields of the schema.</li>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
         <li><code>ALL</code>: the value part of the record contains all fields of the schema, even if they are part of the key.</li>
```

>          <li><code>EXCEPT_KEY</code>: the value part of the record doesn't include primary key values.</li>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
         <li><code>EXCEPT_KEY</code>: the value part of the record contains all fields of the schema except the key fields.</li>
```

       </ul>
       </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td><h5>sink.parallelism</h5></td>
      <td>optional</td>
      <td style="word-wrap: break-word;">(none)</td>
      <td>Integer</td>

>       <td>Defines the parallelism of the Upsert kafka sink operator. By default, the parallelism is determined by the framework using the same parallelism of the upstream chained operator.</td>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      <td>Defines the parallelism of the upsert-kafka sink operator. By default, the parallelism is determined by the framework using the same parallelism of the upstream chained operator.</td>
```

    </tr>
    </tbody>
</table>

Features
----------------

### Primary Key Constraints

> The Upsert Kafka always works in the upsert fashion and requires to define the primary key in the ddl. With the assumption that records with the same key are ordered,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Upsert Kafka always works in the upsert fashion and requires to define the primary key in the DDL. With the assumption that records with the same key should be ordered in the same partition,
```

the primary key semantic on the changelog source means the materialized changelog is unique on the primary keys. The primary key definition will also control
which fields should end up in Kafka’s key.

### Changelog Source

When the Upsert Kafka works as the source, it produces the changelog stream from the topic. Generally speaking, the Upsert Kafka requires the topic is <a href="https://kafka.apache.org/documentation/#compaction"><code>'compacted'</code></a>
and all data with the same key are in the same partition. To keep the data integrity, the Upsert Kafka disallows to specify the reading position, which means Upsert Kafka always uses the `earliest-offset`.

### Changelog Sink

The Upsert Kafka has the ability to keep the records with the same key into the same partition by <code>'HASH'</code> partitioner. At the same time, the upsert-kafka will

> always try their best to not send the UPDATE-BEFORE message to the storage comparing to the kafka with CDC format.

Reviewer: We have moved these part to the top.

### Consistency Guarantees

By default, an Upsert Kafka sink ingests data with at-least-once guarantees into a Kafka topic if the query is executed with [checkpointing enabled]({% link dev/stream/state/checkpointing.md %}#enabling-and-configuring-checkpointing).

> With the at-least-once guarantees, it may get duplicate records but keep the order of the records. When the Upsert Kafka materializes the changelog, the duplicate records will
> not destroy of the final results. Therefore, at-least-once guarantees is enough.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means, Flink may write duplicate records with the same key into the Kafka topic. But as the connector is working in the upsert mode, the last record on the same key will take effect when reading back as a source. Therefore, the upsert-kafka connector achieves idempotent writes just like the [HBase sink]({{ site.baseurl }}/dev/table/connectors/hbase.html).
```

values are interpreted in a special way: a record with a null value represents a “DELETE”.

As a sink, the upsert-kafka connector can consume a changelog stream. It will write INSERT/UPDATE_AFTER
data as normal Kafka messages value, and write DELETE data as Kafka messages with null values
(indicate tombstone for the key). Flink will guarantee the message ordering on the primary key by
partition data on the values of the primary key columns, so the update/deletion messages on the same
key will fall into the same partition.

Dependencies
------------

In order to set up the upsert-kafka connector, the following table provide dependency information for
both projects using a build automation tool (such as Maven or SBT) and SQL Client with SQL JAR bundles.

{% assign connector = site.data.sql-connectors['upsert-kafka'] %}
{% include sql-connector-download-table.html
    connector=connector
%}

Full Example
----------------

The example below shows how to create and use an Upsert Kafka table:

<div class="codetabs" markdown="1">
<div data-lang="SQL" markdown="1">
{% highlight sql %}
CREATE TABLE pageviews_per_region (
  region STRING,
  pv BIGINT,
  uv BIGINT,

>   PRIMARY KEY region NOT ENFORCED

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  PRIMARY KEY (region) NOT ENFORCED
```

) WITH (
  'connector' = 'upsert-kafka',
  'topic' = 'pageviews_per_region',
  'properties.bootstrap.servers' = '...',

>   'key.format' = 'csv',

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  'key.format' = 'avro',
```

最好不要用 csv，我记得 csv 在处理单字段的时候是有问题的。
可以本地测试试试这个 example。

Author: 我会检查下的
